Send emails out and ask who would be willing on a pro bono basis to see our students in their hometowns if they have anything that begins to well up or create a problem.
And we had, oh, I don't know how many psychologists around the state of Texas volunteer.
And we only had about three to six students who used a psychologist over the Christmas break.
But they saw them right in their hometown, and it was great because we lose them for four to five weeks.
So that was great.
The University of Texas director called me.
and said, Wade, do you need me to send staff over there, which was wonderful.
It was amazing how many
Kids at other campuses in Texas were affected by this, because they all had friends here.
And SMU, the director there, told me they were affected by the bonfire tragedy.
Houston, you know, you name it.
Yeah.
So even in that tragedy, Aggie Spirit was... Oh, yeah, absolutely.
That's what I mean.
I think you feel the pain more intensely.
but the support to get out of the pain is also so much greater at a school like this.
It really is.
Looking at all of Bonfire and how the institution handled it, what would you say in regard to how A&M dealt with that tragedy?
The first thing that comes to mind is that I think the president, I mean, courageous isn't even the right word.
I just like the way he bore responsibility.
I would have to bet you that attorneys tried to convince him to distance himself.
And bless his heart, he stood up and said, yes, I am responsible.
And I think that was just the beginning of the right response.
My respect and regard for him was always good.
It just shot up.
I think that was great.
I think the independent commission was the right way to go.
The fact that they had no Aggies on the thing and it was headed by somebody who's not affiliated with A&M, I thought that was the right clean way to do it.
And I contrast that with my alma mater.
who had two members of the Board of Regents who handled the Bobby Knight thing.
There's all kinds of dual issues and conflicts and that's yucky and messy.
So I think it was handled the right way.
I think the President's absolutely right.
He can't afford to have any more students die.
He can't afford to do that.
And I think the institution is taking its time and trying to be prudent and as the phrase goes, do the right thing.
I just think the response to the bonfire after the tragedy has been first class, just superbly excellent, really has.
I've gone to most every bonfire there's ever been since I've been here, and I never really thought about the possibilities, the risks, and the liability of that undertaking.
I was probably one of those naive people who just saw you every year.
This appears, and it's perfectly safe and wonderful.
Same here.
Gosh.
Let's see.
Then, looking back on all these years, of what are you most proud of your service here?
I'm going to use proud and appreciative.
I'm appreciative that a conservative environment that probably wasn't very psychologically minded allowed us to come in and begin to render a service
that would help kids get through and graduate.
That I appreciate a great deal.
I appreciate the resources, the support from COLDIS and my colleagues and faculty and staff that we've dealt with have been great.
I'm proud that by and large we've hired a staff that has been very student oriented and I've always
Whenever I've interviewed people at conferences or here, I'm always trying to figure out, I'm trying to discriminate between the one who wants to be a professor and teach, which is very worthy, but I want the person who wants to be a service provider in that.
And so I think we've had a lot, I'm proud of a lot of the staff who've come through here that either are here now or have been here.
They've been really good.
I have two tests that I,
that are not formal and I'm sure would be looked down if Susan Erza got a hold of me.
I always think in the back of my mind, number one, would I want my son and daughter counseled by this person?
And number two, if this person were at a bus stop, would they even be socially desirable enough that I would even want to strike the conversation with them?
If they can't pass those two tests, it's not looking good.
I don't care about the PhDs or where the internship is from or any of that stuff.
So I'm really proud of the staff here and the support the institution has given to the place.
I'm proud of the fact that I truly believe we have saved over the years hundreds of lives.
I think people would have killed themselves were it not for the environment and the people in this center.
Advice to, now you're a consultant, advice for the future to this group of professionals in the counseling center, what advice would you give them?
Always students are number one and I don't mean that you don't get concerned about staff, you do because without them you got nothing.
You got to always remember who's paying the bills and why you're here.
And it's not so you can get a paycheck.
That's not the point of it all.
It's to help the kids.
And that's the thing that overwhelmingly, that and I think using resources prudently.
I think is another thing.
We're blessed at A&M with the possibilities, but I don't ever want to take those for granted.
And I think everybody needs to be a good steward of the state's funds, the kids' funds, the parents' funds, the loans, all of that.
The other thing is I think you've got to
believe you've got to use the intrinsic rewards you get out of helping people.
Because a lot of these people could go out in private practice and probably make more money, although we're not paying them badly.
But they could earn more money.
I think you've got to really revel in what you get out of helping people.
If you're not getting a kick out of that, then probably not, you're in the wrong place.
All right.
Advice to Vice President Sutherland and President Bowen.
Keep supporting your student counseling service.
Advice to them, I would say to do all they can to support the welcoming of different groups into the culture, into the A&M culture.
which I think the university has done such a good job of over the years, more and more.
I think that's important.
Boy, see, I think so many things that Malin does are right on target.
Because I know his big kicks over the last few years have been risk management, which is critical, came out of the bonfire.
Marketing, letting people know what we do and how we're available to help.
Diversity, he's been supportive of that, which is what I mentioned to begin with.
So he's doing so many things that are right.
I don't know that I have a lot of advice for him beyond those things.
And you all relocated over here under Coldus?
Yes, and that was not a pretty picture for a while.
Malin Sutherland, bless his heart, when he was associate VP, somehow he was in the negotiation to get this building for us.
And then I was told that I would be granted
$175,000 to remodel it because it was the old athletic dorm.
It had, you know, cinder block walls and tile floors, and it was not very pretty.
And it's not a lovely building on the outside.
In fact, President Bowen is, I've heard he wants the new Residence Life Administration building built in front of ours, so it hides this building as an eyesore.
But anyway, so...
I was told by one person in whatever department it is in physical plant that it would take 175 to put carpet down and cover up the cinder block and make this a more inviting
And then that person dropped off the job and a young woman came on it from the same department and she said, Dr. Birch, I tell you this, you got about half the money you need.
You need another $175,000 to really do.
I felt like I got lowball, but I understand I'm one among many people who has been displeased that the estimates they are given
Oh, and I've gone through that a number of times.
So anyway, that was tough because this building sat empty for 15 months while we went looking for the other 175,000.
In fact, I once got so frustrated after about a year of this that I wrote John a note.
And I didn't attack him directly.
I attacked the situation that I thought was just had gotten ridiculous.
And I remember Malin apparently saw the note and Malin said to me, boy, he said, I would never in my lifetime write to my boss a letter like that.
But this is born out of a year of frustration.
And staff saying to me, the building's sitting there.
When are we going?
Why don't you?
Why?
And then I had the unfortunate experience, no, I don't know if it's unfortunate, the experience of John and I going around to different officials in the university trying to find pockets of money.
We visited with Jerry Gaston, we visited with Robert Smith, and it felt like
a hat in hand kind of thing, like almost a begging and that, and it was not pretty.
Finally, John was successful in getting the money, bless his heart, but boy, that was a frustrating 15 months.
But when you did get over here, has it turned into a good... Oh, yeah, yeah.
It's, like I said, the outside of the building isn't great.
We were worried students, you know, the Y building's a popular building, so we were worried we came over here, students wouldn't find us.
That was a fallacy.
Yeah, the facility has been wonderful.
So it's worked well.
Great.
Are there any major problems to be solved right now by your successor?
Yeah.
We have the career ladder that I instituted is probably too generous.
I think the percentage increases from 15 need to be lowered somewhat.
What's the phenomena we're having happen is that, see, it used to be in counseling centers, the only way to go up in terms of responsibility and income was to go administrative.
And you get a lot of people in our business who have no interest in becoming administrative.
So what we really did was we set up a parallel track
of progression which was clinical.
If you could become a master therapist, a master counselor psychologist, we're going to reward you.
Well, I've got a situation now where I've got some senior staff psychologists who are probably only 4,000 a year under what an associate director is making.
Now interestingly, Haskell, I have two female associate directors and two male associate directors.
The male associate director's opinion is, hey, if that happens, that's what we intended.
The two females are over my dead body.
And so there's a budding problem with our compensation, our reward system.
I think the percentages need to be dropped down to 12 or 10.
Because, see, the psychologists and the professional counselors by job title have a career ladder.
Associate directors don't have a career ladder.
Other people in our center don't have it.
They do, and they get this advantage, which we did for the purpose of stopping the attrition.
But I think that's a problem.
Space is a budding problem.
We're going to be hiring hopefully a database manager, webmaster.
We need space for that person to work.
We need more psychologists and more academic career counselors.
More than 50% of the students who come here come for learning skills and choice of major, choice of career.
But that's only a staff of four people.
The other 50% come for the psychological services.
They stay longer.
Person and personal counseling stays about six to seven sessions.
Person for academic career comes about one to three.
Now when you came, the staff was how many compared to now?
The first year we had three, including myself, three professional staff and a secretary, and the budget was $65,000.
And today it's 37 staff, all told, and the budget next year will be $2.68 million.
And it's almost all of that money is student fees?
86% of the fees are money as students, or 14% is E&G.
Yeah, and that's what I mean.
Boy, that's the thing about A&M.
When it decides it'll do something, boy.
So when you retire this... July, August, actually August, early August.
After 27 years, as you walk out the door, you will feel how about all these years?
Like I left A&M a better place than I found it.
that I and the staff have done a damn good job.
And if you could make a big financial contribution to A&M, for what purpose would you want your contribution used?
You could do it in seven figures or more.
Oh, yeah.
Well, part of it would come here, obviously.
But I think another part would go to any of the programs that
promote the unity of the campus and the camaraderie, and I'd have to figure out which those were, but I think that's so critical to this institution.
I sound like an old ag now, but it's so critical not to lose that.
That's why I say I constantly am amazed at how A&M's retained its fundamental value system and at the same time opened its doors to a lot of different people.
And the last question is, what feelings do you carry in your heart for Texas A&M?
Oh, can't imagine.
Can't imagine working professionally in a better place than this.
Resources, bright people, people who give a damn, people who are concerned with excellence,
I just, I just, I mean, I love Florida State and I love Indiana University and all that, but in terms of a place to express oneself professionally and that, you do not throw your, what's the saying, the biblical one, your pearl before swine at this place.
You really don't.
It's worth whatever expenditure you make at A&M.
It's been a stunning career for me.
Great place.
Let's quit there.